oh I'm sorry briefing is about to start
girl food and welcome to today's Downing
Street press conference I'm pleased to
be joined by chief medical officer
professor Chris Witte and also our chief
of Defense staff sir Nicholas Carter
before c.d.s talks through the fantastic
work that our brilliant armed forces
have been doing during this crisis let
me give you an update on the latest data
from the Kobra coronavirus data file and
I can report that through the
government's ongoing monitoring and
testing program as of today 559
have now been tested for the virus 130
3495 have tested positive and are those
who have contracted the virus
18100 have very sadly died and we
express our deepest condolences to the
families and friends of these victims
and my heart goes out to every single
one of those who have lost a loved one
throughout this crisis as a government
we continue to take the steps necessary
to slow the spread of this virus the
social distancing measures that people
have overwhelmingly adhered to have
meant that fewer people have needed
hospital treatment that has protected
our NHS capacity as we continue through
the peak of this virus and it's
undoubtedly helped to save lives at
every point in this crisis we've
considered the scientific and the
medical evidence that we've received
very carefully and we've been deliberate
in our actions so that we take the right
steps at the right time now I know it's
been tough going tough going for
businesses for families the vulnerable
members of our communities up and down
the country and it's been a physical
strain as we adapt to living and working
at home while not seeing our family and
our friends in the usual way we would
like to it's been an economic strain as
businesses have had a furlough staff
which is why the chance to launch the
various business support measures to
help see businesses and workers through
these difficult times but it's also been
an immense mental strain on everyone
people stuck at home families worried
about their finances and the elderly
more isolated than we'd ever want them
to be we are making progress through the
preak of this virus but we're not out of
the woods yet as Sage advised last week
that's why the measures we introduced
must remain in place for the time being
the greatest risk for us now if we used
up on our social distancing rules too
soon is that we would risk a second
spike in the virus with all the threats
to life that that would bring and then
the risk of a second lockdown which
would prolong the economic pain that
we're all going through and that was a
point that Andrew Bailey the governor of
the Bank of England also made earlier on
today so with that in mind last Thursday
I set out the five principles that will
guide our approach going forward to the
next phase and which must be satisfied
before we were willing and in a position
to make any changes which will of course
be based on the advice that we receive
from Sage that way we will ensure that
our path out of this crisis is
sure-footed protecting both the public's
health but also our economy if we stick
to our plan if we take the right steps
at the right time we can get through
this crisis and I know we will there's
no hiding the scale of this tragedy but
even in our darkest moments the crisis
has also shown a light on the best
amongst us and the nation has come
together to applaud our heroic NHS staff
our carers every week and we pay tribute
to their dedication their
professionalism and the care with which
they look after those who have fallen
sick and with general Carter here today
I think it's only fitting to pay tribute
to the amazing work of our fantastic
Armed Forces and their whole mo D led by
defense secretary Ben Wallace
they have been there every step of the
way helping us to build the new NHS
Nightingale Nightingale hospitals to
reinforce our critical care capacity
supporting our local resilience forums
in delivering personal protective
equipment where it's needed most and
helping also to deliver the mobile labs
which are critical
to ramping up our testing capacity right
across the country and as a result of
those efforts and that teamwork
hospitals have been able to treat more
patients as a result they've saved more
lives and we've ensured that the peak of
this virus has not overwhelmed the NHS
and today our armed forces are again
part of that team as we announced two
new deployments to the NHS Nightingale
facilities in Harrogate and Bristol and
across the UK this extra Hospital
capacity which itself comes on top of
the 33,000 additional beds we've managed
to free up across the NHS that's the
equivalent of building an extra 50
district general hospitals and as I said
that has safeguarded the capacity in our
hospitals both to care for coronavirus
patients but also to make sure other
people get the urgent care or the
emergency treatment they need people
used to joke in this country that you
could never build a hospital that
quickly well we didn't just build one we
built seven and we thank our armed
forces for helping to make that happen
and you know for many countries around
the world including modern democracies
the sight of their military on the
streets in a national emergency could be
a cause for concern or even trepidation
but for the British people the sight of
our armed forces working side-by-side
with our brilliant NHS staff offers a
calm reassurance but the task is at hand
and that we will come through this
crisis now I make no bones about it
there have been challenges there still
are challenges we're not there yet we
continue to ramp up the testing capacity
which will play a really important role
in the next phase of the crisis I missed
a global shortage in personal protective
equipment we've distributed over a
billion items to the frontline where
it's needed most we've just brought in
Lord Dayton who helped organise the
London Olympics to boost our domestic
supply even further and I'm on the phone
every day pursuing the next batch of
deliveries from abroad with the support
of our tireless diplomatic service and
the first of several new deliveries
landed from Turkey
in the early hours this morning we will
only come through this global pandemic
if we come together as a nation and if
we bring other countries around the
world together
so that we can rise to this
international challenge and as we work
with our partners abroad to get the PPE
we need to get their ventilators we need
to pursue a vaccine for this terrible
virus we're also working night and day
to return stranded British nationals
from all corners of the world
we kept airports open and airlines
running to bring over a million Brits
home on commercial flights a massive
endeavor and on top of that at the FCO
we set up a 75 million pound special
Charter arrangement with the airlines
and that's already brought home over
13,000 people on 63 flights from more
than a dozen countries and we're
organizing more charter flights in the
days ahead
from India Pakistan Bangladesh New
Zealand Nigeria and Sierra Leone so at
home and abroad we're meeting the whole
range of challenges that coronavirus
presents and if we stick together and if
we stay the course we will defeat this
virus for good and I think I'll now turn
over to Sanok to brief us on the latest
military involvement in the effort first
secretary thank you very much
the first Secretary's asked me today to
give you an update on what the armed
forces and defense as a whole is doing
in support of the government's response
to the virus up front I would say that
our role has been entirely in support of
the heroic health care workers on the
front line that's both the NHS and
social care with humility very much
being our watchword in the way that we
give that support we've done it in a
variety of ways we've supported first
and foremost the Ministry of Housing
community and local government and the
devolved administration's through the
National spine of local regional fora
that the first secretary referred to and
we've have dozens of liaison officers
embedded into each of those fora it's a
tried and tested system that's been used
many times in the past weather for
delivering military aid to the civil
authorities through for the
foot-and-mouth or for flooding or for
wildfires it's frequently exercised and
there are very close relationships with
give great confidence between all of
those who are working on those teams at
the lower level and I think it's
important this because of course it's
that delegated sense at that level which
works because it makes them much more
responsive and much more flexible to
local demand whether it's for ambulance
drivers or for testing or for whatever
else with decentralization being so much
of the key to the way some of this is
done and the defense secretary delegated
authorities to this level early in the
camp here early in the crisis which has
proved to be extraordinary successful
we've also been giving support to the
Department for Health and Social Care
and of course the NHS first and foremost
this has been a logistic task and I
would say that I think in all of my more
than 40 years of service this is the
single greatest logistic challenge that
I've come across I'll just give you a
scale of the problem in 25 days since we
started working together with the NHS
they've gone from some 240 customers
they delivered to normally to nearly
50,000 customers this is involved
creating 260,000 square feet of
distribution warehousing that's nearly
four football fields worth and and some
thirty eight additional delivery routes
per day that's equivalent to driving
three times around the world that is a
major logistic challenge we've of course
been involved in the nightingales which
the first secretary referred to but
we've also been involved in planning and
what we call command and control
providing additional resilience to
hard-pressed staff and we've got dozens
of people embedded both in Skipton house
but also in Victoria house where the DHS
see headquarters is we're involved in
testing both in terms of playing a role
in helping design the system but also in
Manning some of the regional test
centers and adopting some innovative
approaches like mobile pop-up centers
which will make it possible to get to
the decentralized areas that I described
early and a brigade commander we have
their Brigadier Lizzy faithful Davis and
her team have been very imaginative in
the way that they've taken this forward
and of course we've provided an aviation
task force that's been able to support
the communities from Scotland down to
the Channel Islands in Northern Ireland
and from Wales to the east coast of
England we've been involved in helping
the Foreign Office with repatriations
and supporting our overseas territories
where we have security advisory teams
deployed now in several of them and of
course we've deployed ships HMS Argos to
do just that and we've been involved
with the Cabinet Office Rapid Response
Unit with our 77 Brigade helping to
quash rumors from misinformation but
also to counter disinformation between
three and four thousand of our people
have been involved with around 20,000
available the whole time at high
readiness we've probably have at the
moment some seventy-three ongoing tasks
and we've probably completed about 30
what's interesting is it's been very
much a whole force not just of regular
military from all the three services but
reservists as well some 15 percent of
the force has been reservists it's
involved defence civilians defense
contractors scientists from Portland
down and something called the engineer
and logistics staff core where we bring
in people from industry who work inside
the military in times of crisis and
provide expert support for how we might
link into the civilian community to
bring forward skills and indeed
industrial support the skills have been
about planning logisticians medics
engineers and CIS or IT based people and
the road has been very much about
catalyzing designing and supporting and
I'll just single out one individual to
give you an example of the sort of
backgrounds that were talking about a
young major called major AB Muktar has
been mobilized from the reserve he's
really stepped up to the plate his
daytime job is as a logistics expert who
runs Google's transport network across
Europe North Africa and the Middle East
he's been part of the supply team that's
been working on how he distributes PPE
he's designed an e portal in partnership
with ebay which will in due course
manage individual customers and he
designed a bulk supply chain for
distribution of PPE to all of the NHS
regions and trusts now despite all of
this we are still involved of course in
protecting the country and there are
essential operations that must continue
whether that's defending the homeland
with the nuclear deterrent or protecting
British and UK airspace more generally
whether it's overseas operations in
Afghanistan the Middle East Africa and
further afield or whether it's about
fielding essential operational
capability and what we do as we do this
is to take great care not to endanger
the population all of this is a truly
national endeavor
we've even mobilized ninety nine year
old veterans and I think everyone would
agree that captain Tom Moore embodies
the sense of service and duty ingrained
in our armed forces our own forces are
drawn from every part of the United
Kingdom and much of the Commonwealth and
they take great pride in serving the
communities that they are part of
everyone is experiencing real challenges
at the moment and it makes me feel
immensely proud of our collective
national effort in pulling together
behind those on the front line to combat
this unprecedented challenge which I
firmly believe we will defeat together
thank you
brilliant thank you very much Chris
would you talk us through some of the
latest data please thank about first
secretary and before I do can I just on
behalf of my colleagues in the net NHS
thank the Armed Forces enormous Lee for
the assistance they've given us which
has been absolutely terrific these
slides are I think familiar to most
people who watch this the first is a
look at transport usage in in the
country and its really as a proxy for
our people continuing to stay at home
except for essential business and as you
can see although there is some bumping
along it is broadly remained very stable
despite the fact that people have had to
do this for a considerable now period of
time and there is further time we're
going to have to do this if we wish to
pull the peak of this right down next
slide please
looking at new cases in the UK these are
tests positive whether they're in
hospital or out of hospital as you can
see this is broadly flat with a slight
trend downwards over the last several
days really back to about the 8th of
April but not a steep descent at this
point now
slide please and if you look at people
in hospital with Co vid 19 looking
across the country the situation is
either improving and I think it's pretty
clearly improving for example in London
all broadly flat across all four nations
next slide please
if you look at people who have sadly
died in hospital this is not all deaths
but this is probably the majority of
those who've sadly died decoded what you
can see again is that the very steep
upward climb that there was up to the
earlier part of this month has now
flattened off over the last week and a
half
next slide please and this is a slide we
use just really to track the trajectory
between different countries I should be
clear that trying to compare different
countries using these kind of data is
notoriously difficult but it does show
the trajectories between the different
countries with the UK using hospital
data which is our most steady source of
data over that time next slide please
this is just one slide we thought we
would add in in addition because I think
it makes a point which i think is
important for people fully to understand
and what you can see here this is the
seven-day rolling average for deaths
sadly in several countries including the
UK and the reason I thought it was
sensible to put this in was the people
to see that even in those countries
which started their epidemic curve
earlier than the UK and which are still
ahead the downward slope from the point
where we change is a relatively slow one
and we should anticipate the same
situation in the UK we should not expect
this to be a sudden fall away of cases
thank you very much thank you very much
Chris let's turn to the media have we
got Allison Holt there from the BBC yes
first secretary I'm worrying figures
today suggested doubling in care home
deaths in England in a virus that
gets the the elderly and the vulnerable
do you see that as inevitable I didn't
catch the last bit of it I'll let Chris
Witte talk about the I think the CQC eat
it why don't you please Thanks so we've
seen a doubling in Cairo figures
suggesting a doubling in care home
deaths in England in a virus that
targets the elderly and the vulnerable
do you see that as inevitable no I don't
think anything's inevitable we're
fighting tooth and nail striving every
sinew to make sure we minimize the like
lost in all contexts I'll let Chris
witty say a little bit more about the
CQC data which I think is going to be
published but obviously in care homes
whether it's on PPE testing a PPE
deliveries whether it's on testing
across the whole range of things that
we're looking at we are doing everything
we can to make sure we provide the
support to them to protect the care
homes to protect the workers there and
obviously to protect the residents as
well of course there is a it is a
vulnerable part of our community if you
like and we are targeting all of our
efforts to make sure that we protect and
safeguard as best we can the most
vulnerable in our society Chris do you
want something on the CQC well I'm not
on CQC it doesn't yet publish this
report but I think in terms of care home
deaths sadly your your starting position
is of course correct in care homes what
we have is a large number of people of
the most vulnerable age for this virus
this is a virus which is particularly a
virus of people who are older and
particularly a virus which causes severe
disease and death in a minority but
increasingly not minority as as you go
up in age and in those who have
coexisting medical problems and many
people in care homes of course and
nursing homes in particular have
coexisting medical problems so they are
a very vulnerable group you're
absolutely right
the numbers that have been ascribed to
Cova directly in ons statistics are
still relatively modest but i I've saved
repeated
in data you know the fact that the ONS
said in their last weekly report 826 des
every one of them a tragedy but I think
that would be an underestimate and what
what we need to look at in these data
and other data if we want to get a true
picture is and I've said this right from
the beginning the all-cause seasonally
adjusted mortality over time and that is
because as I've said again before deaths
from Co vide will be a combination of
direct deaths from the virus and also
indirect deaths if for example people
are nervous about going into hospital
and I think one of the things we've been
trying to make really clear is it is
absolutely critical that if people have
heart attacks strokes children have
asthma severe asthma attacks any of the
things that have severity this would
include people in social care settings
that the NHS remains absolutely able to
manage emergencies as it always has been
able to manage emergencies but when we
look back over this epidemic and I want
to be really clear we are not anywhere
near being able to say right that's done
we can now look back when we are at that
stage I'm sure we will see a high
mortality rate sadly in care homes
because this is a very very vulnerable
group and they're coming people are
coming in and out of care homes and that
cannot to some extent be prevented
Alison do you want to follow up on any
of that just a quick follow up I mean
families and starting care homes have
heard lots of promises about protective
equipment about testing but what I'm
being told is they're just still not
seeing that on the ground
so what reassurance would you give them
that they are being made a priority in
this look we're conscious that there's a
challenge with care homes where I've
said that in my earlier remarks but we
are doing everything we can the
situation is improving we are getting
the PPE to those places that need it we
are working with the military in
relation to some of the mobile testing
labs because we know that it's difficult
for some people in in care homes to
access the testing and where we've
revised the guidance although the NHS
the guidance to make sure on discharge
there we're absolutely being very
careful with those that go into care
home so we're doing everything we can we
understand the that their concerns are
anxiety we you know I feel for those who
are living in care homes and and nervous
about this or their loved ones and we're
doing absolutely everything we can to
protect them Robert Peston from the IT
from ITV representatives of the TSSAA
Transport Union have been told to
prepare for a possible increase in a
phased way on the railway service
between the 11th and 18th of May now
we're obviously not looking at an exit
it's from lockdown but is that a
timetable for modifications of the
lockdown
and and secondly overseas doctors and
nurses working in the NHS pay a
surcharge of hundreds of pounds a year
thousands if they've got families to use
the NHS given that they are putting
their lives on the line to protect us is
there a case for waiving that surcharge
well first of all the dates that you
described I don't know where they come
from it's not something I recognise and
as Chris witty has rightly said and as
the governor of the Bank of England has
said so you've got it from the public
health but also the economic perspective
it would be a mistake to take our off
the ball right now the focus is still
delivering us through the peak and we're
obviously reliant as I said last
Thursday on the data that we get back
from Sage in a couple of weeks time in
order to even think about the next phase
and in relation to people here from
overseas working in NHS the Home
Secretary is already outlined some
measures to make sure that their
interests the safeguarded
well we pay tribute to the incredible
job they do and of course we want to
look after them in every way possible
Rob did you want to come back on any any
of that you didn't really say when the
surcharge would be would would be waived
and just on on these union
representatives is it just that their
managers have just got it wrong well I
don't know the on the union's what
information they've got but I'm
you that that is not a government
timetable we've had lots of attempts to
put that to us and I understand why
people try and do that that is
absolutely not a timetable that we're
working to that I recognize all that is
under consideration right now and I'll
defer to the Home Secretary on and the
health secretary on issues around the
surcharge but I think the point I would
want to make really loudly and really
clearly as we pay tribute to all those
from overseas who doing a heroic job in
our NHS on the front line
beth rigby from sky thank you a question
for us to Professor Witte please we've
talked a lot about PPE shortages and
trying to plug the gaps but NHS workers
just want to know they have the
equipment they need when they turn up at
work can you tell me when you expect the
shortages to be resolved is it three
days is it a week or can't you answer
that question and to the first secretary
please the health secretary said today
we've reached the peak of the crisis and
he said it was time to reopen the NHS
for routine care is this the light at
the end of the tunnel that we have been
talking about and waiting for and might
we all look forward to some modest
easing of restrictions on May the 7th
when you review the lockdown so there's
certainly light at the end of the tunnel
there is a glimmer but we're not that
we're not there yet I think the the way
I would describe it but I'll defer to
Chris on where we are we're coming
through the pig but we're not there yet
and I think the health sector is
repeating what CMO is already said which
is you know one of the positives one of
the successes amidst all the challenges
which I'm open to and accept has been
that we have kept NHS capacity with the
Headroom not just to deal with covert 19
patients but to deal with all of those
other people who have got ailments
injuries or new who need treatment I've
heard Chris witty said before the NHS is
still there for them and I think he
wanted to echo at that point in terms of
PPE so I'm not a procure international
procurement expert so in a sense I'm
going to say what I'm told rather
pretend any expertise in this area but
it is very clear that at the moment we
are tight at different times for
different items of PPE it's not all it's
not everything at all times but
different things at different points
have been very very close to the line
and of course when you're close to the
line inefficiencies in any kind of part
of the system tend to lead to local
stockers so if you're very very heavily
overstocked that's less true and this is
why the support from the Armed Forces
and so on has been so critical to trying
to reduce this so at this point in time
we are still close to the line but at a
national level we're not underwater on
anything that I'm aware of and I keep
quite a close eye on this because I care
very deeply about this as do all members
of my profession but of course there may
be local issues and I'm aware of them
from my colleagues along the way and all
of us want to be in a position where
there is a sufficient excess over a long
period of time that this can all be
balanced out but because of a
combination of excellent work from the
Armed Forces and mutual aid where
different hospitals and care homes and
others are sharing what they have we
have broadly and this is a tribute to
the services involved managed a very
difficult situation without yet getting
to the point where that were no longer
able to cope with it but I think we you
know to promise now that in two or three
days this is all going to be sorted in
the context of the credibly difficult
according to my colleagues and I see
absolutely no reason to disbelieve them
having read the international press a
credibly difficult situation where
everybody every country wants these and
the suppliers are very limited I think
would be a mistake I think what we need
to do is we need to manage it as best it
is possible to be managed and I'm very
aware that my expert colleagues in this
area are working and the whole time on
this and I care about it and I check on
this the whole time and they assure me
that they are and I can see that they
are and that is why we've managed to
keep just ahead at a national level with
some significant local pressures from
time to time Beth did you want to come
back yeah yeah just just quickly in
terms of the lockdown ion
to stand that you don't want to spell
out exactly what you intend but the
Irish Prime Minister has told the Irish
people he will at least give them a
roadmap by May the fifth give them a
sense of how they might begin to work
through this Germany is allowing some
smaller shops to reopen I understand
that you might want to flex the model
but the British people aren't silly I
mean they are understand what's facing
them can't you at least give them some
idea of what might be coming down the
road well that's why on Thursday I set
out these five principles but and the
key to that is recognizing that we don't
want to risk a second spike in the virus
and the challenge that we've got is that
as the transmission rate comes down we
need to get more data as to precisely
where it is in order to inform the
measures that we could actively consider
so I think it's I think the responsible
thing to do if I may say at least on the
data that we've got is to make sure
we've got that evidence before we start
doubting around ideas at the risk of
them not being at either us not me not
to deliver them or taking them and then
risking a second spike and I do think
again it was itsomething Chris's has
highlighted but also Andrew Bailey the
governor of the Bank of England we must
avoid a second spike and so whilst I
know people will be wanting us to give
them more information and the minute we
can responsibly do so based on the
evidence we will at the moment right now
and I think the vast majority of people
in this country recognize it we've got
to keep our eye on the ball because
we're coming through the peak but we're
not done yet
Laura making issue it from British
forces news good evening first Secretary
of State you've praised the work of the
military today but there are 20,000
personnel on standby to help in this
crisis and fewer than 3000 have actually
been deployed so are you under utilizing
a call of very skilled people that could
essentially take the strain off the NHS
further perhaps be deployed to all NHS
Nightingale hospitals to the chief of
the Defence Staff the government still
says it hopes to reach a hundred
thousand coab in 19 tests a day by the
end of the month will you be helping to
ensure that that target is met will you
be taking over drive-through test sites
for example and to Professor Witte if
I'm a scientist at Porton Down
Laboratories are trying to work out what
percentage or proportion of the
population might have been infected with
Kovac 19 how're those figures looking
well just on the question you asked me
of course we want to make sure we use
all of our resources in the right way
that complements and supplements the
brilliant work of the NHS and we're
always talking and considering what more
can be done I talked about the
deployment to the new Nightingale
hospitals I've been talking with the
defense secretary about the mobile
testing labs and and how we can deploy
them in the future
but of course you know those are
difficult decisions we've got to make
sure that we deploy our resources where
they add the greatest value and in the
right way cynic I don't know whether you
want to go back on I might have a go at
the first part of your question as well
I mean the answer is that we have
deployed all that we have needed to
deploy at this stage in support of the
organizations that were working for
there is more there if people need it
but the sort of skills and capabilities
that are in the remaining 20,000 are not
necessarily the ones that people need at
this point in time and to your question
about testing yes we're working very
closely with the DHS C and with the NHS
and more broadly through the local forum
that I described in my opening remarks
because what we're trying to do is to
help design the right system with the
team in DHS C that can provide the sort
of testing that customers need so that
you match demand to supply in the right
way and that's why the innovative idea
of pop-ups are like mobile libraries we
think will be a very useful way of going
and what we're trying to do at the
moment is to upscale that idea so that
we've got enough capacity to be able to
get out into those areas which are
harder to reach so it's an overall
system that's been put together at the
moment and it will be very sophisticated
once it's completed and there's some
very really good people designing it and
we're working with those people to make
it as good as it possibly can be
Chris on the last point on the last one
so you're absolutely right that Porton
Down has some of the best capacity to do
what's called serological testing this
is the testing the antibody testing
where you can tell whether someone in
the past has had an infection including
a Ovid 19 the problem we have had is
that we do not yet have a test that is
as good as we would want even with the
expertise
of the academic sector Porton Down and
their expertise public health England in
their expertise and Industry and many
different people are trying to work on
an improved test there are there are
fairly good tests at the moment on this
but there are not very good tests this
is one of the critical bits of
information we need to make decisions
and I'm hoping but I've been hoping for
a while so I don't want to over promise
on this that we will shortly have tests
that are good enough to get at least a
ranging shot as to what proportion of
people in different age groups in
different parts of the country have had
this virus but we're not yet at the
point I think where we have a test we
can't say that reliably but I'm hope
hoping we will be able to do so in the
pretty near future what would you would
you like a follow-up there all right we
obviously have heard from so many places
now that there's a real shortage of PPE
our military themselves going to be
protected enough when they're helping in
these incidents and when they're
deployed and also is there any update on
what's happened with the arrival of that
PP from Turkey is that on the front line
with those medical staff that need it
now or is it still being checked well we
obviously very carefully check all the
consignments that we get we've had
reports in other countries of the PPE
that's then distributed to the frontline
it isn't effective not only does it have
to be withdrawn but then you have to
isolate all send into self isolation the
care worker so we do check that very
carefully the consignment has landed and
we are expecting further consignments in
the future but as Chris mentioned
earlier it's an incredibly competitive
market and it just shows you that
Turkish challenge that we had how you
need to have excellent cooperation with
the Turkish government and I had
conversations over the weekend with my
Turkish opposite number and also how
their mo D and the FC I've worked
hand-in-glove together and it's a team
effort to get all of the supplies we
possibly can and we'll continue to do it
and we obviously don't want and we'll
take every step we can to avoid for for
all of those reasons any risk to anyone
on the front line in terms of the
quality of the pp I don't know Nicola
whether you want to say anything more
about that in relation to the military
yes Laura those military personnel who
are deployed alongside
health care workers and the like are
equipped in the same way that they are
for the function that they're performing
Tom Newton done from the Sun for exactly
thank you very much question to you and
the chief medical officer if I may we
understand that sage haven't began at
the issuing masks and they decided to
advise you that it would be a good idea
to wear some sort of Haydn's cloth or
otherwise for people who are
asymptomatic but able to transmit the
disease themselves when you go to meet
to decide on that and time today what's
your advice to people tomorrow morning
going to work should they should they
not be wearing face masks to protect
people and to the chief medical officer
can you tell ittle bit about the work
you're doing at the moment for the end
of the month on restrictions what sort
of shape is that taking and in
particular on the Secretary's fifth and
most important tests as he says on
avoiding a second peak and being sure
you can do that
well can you navigate yourself in the
position that you are sure almost seems
in mobility or are you calmly you can
design some sort of new metric for that
I like great Chris answer that one on
unmask sage as always the case we'll
look at the evolving evidence as we
learn lessons through this crisis they
have been asked to look at the mast
issue again we haven't had the advice
back yet so nothing will change until
we've had that and considered it in
terms of what we're looking to the
future and of course you're absolutely
right this is a critical question not
just for the UK but for other countries
and we share our experiences the there
is an upper and a lower bound of what is
possible the upper bound of this is we
cannot allow the are the force of
transmission to go above 1 for any
extended period at any point because if
it does exponential growth of this will
continue it will resume and we will get
back to a situation where the NHS could
have its emergency services overwhelmed
which we've managed to avoid due to the
remarkable work of the NHS itself and
expanding its activities the British
public
heeding advice to stay home and
significant help of course
from the Armed Forces so but if it goes
back up and you get exponential growth
where you get a doubling time of a few
days there to say it does not take very
long before you move from bad numbers to
really bad numbers over over quite a
short period of time and at one at some
point to the point where the NHS would
really find it very difficult so we
cannot allow that happen at the bottom
end of the the sense the other end of
the bracket of what's possible is this
disease is not going to be eradicated it
is not going to disappear so we have to
accept that we are working with a
disease that we are going to be with
globally this is a global problem for
the foreseeable future and what we're
trying to work out is what are the
things which actually add up to an R of
less than 1 and there are lots of
different options which ministers will
then have to consider but that narrows
our options quite significantly if
you're having to keep the are below 1
and I think we have to be very realistic
that if people are hoping that it's
suddenly going to move from where we are
now in lockdown suddenly into
everything's gone
that is a wholly unrealistic expectation
we're going to have to do a lot of
things for really quite a long period of
time the question is what is the best
package and this is what we're trying to
work out but if you release more of one
area you have to keep an on board more
of another area so there is actually a
proper trade-off and this is what
ministers will are having to consider so
would you like to follow up on any of
that just a good one I think some people
are gonna be some time whether it's a
we're face bar or a morning off to you
all a question but I don't think I gonna
get much more can I just quickly follow
up with professor witty very interesting
on what you're saying about the LR is
establishing or below one enough for you
on easing these particular restrictions
whatever effect that has would you be
want to go down to nought point five
nine point two five or is it just a case
of simply a tiny percentage below or can
you calculate such that you'll be
extremely comfortable with
well are going below not going above one
is a minimum ask that absolutely has to
happen there are then a number of from a
purely health point of view and this
goes back to something I've said before
but I'll repeat myself because obviously
may be different at different audience
there are multiple different ways in
which this epidemic is going to kill
people or cause ill health the direct
causes of death from the kovat the
potential of the indirect causes of
death if the NHS gets overwhelmed which
we have absolutely been determined
should not happen it does not happen to
who we are determined it does not happen
but the third area is people who die
indirectly because the Health Service
has had to be reoriented towards kovat
and therefore you can't do other things
elective things screening a number of
other things that the NHS normally would
do but there is also a final group which
is if the interventions we have extend
deprivation among people that is also a
risk to their long-term health and all
of these are going to have to be taken
into account from a health point of view
and they don't all lead to exactly if
you're optimizing it for one you may not
be optimizing it for another so what we
have to do is think very seriously about
this what is the best balance of
measures that gives us the best public
health outcome which is is does
absolutely include people who died sadly
directive coded but also has to include
all these other factors thanks Tom
can we go next - Gordon Rayner from The
Telegraph Thank You first secretary can
I ask a question for yourself in this
CMO first
can you guarantee the public that if the
Oxford or imperial vaccine trials prove
successful British people who paid for
those trials will be the first to get
the vaccines can I also ask the CMO is
it possible just following on Tom's
question is it possible for us to ease
the lockdown measures before we have a
contract a contact tracing system in
place which the health secretary has
been talking about quite a lot today and
so just lastly what one question for the
for the first secretary specifically in
in October 2016
government ran a pandemic drill called
exercise sickness as you'll know it
involved all major government
departments and simulated an epidemic
similar to the one we're facing today
tens of thousands of people died in the
simulation but its findings had never
been published can you today commit to
making those documents publicly
available no I can't I think if they
were conducted in the circumstances that
you described might have to look very
carefully at the rules around it but I'm
happy to take that away and have a look
at it Chris on the other points vaccines
well I mean that in a sense as a
commercial question as much as it is a
scientific question we obviously the UK
is going to want to get early or very or
you know as fast as we possibly can
access to any effective vaccine in a
sense whether it's developed in the UK
or developed somewhere else but a lot of
work is being put into at the moment
both trying to support the science so
that a an initial vaccine can be done
and we support this directly in the UK
and indirectly elsewhere through other
routes but even once you've got a
vaccine this is a point so patrick
violence has made several times the
government resounding advisor you then
have to go into big trials and then also
and this is the bit people often forget
into manufacturing and scaling up and
all the way along that path we're going
to want to keep track of this and make
sure that the UK has access but i mean
this is not a straightforward position
in terms of the lock down question
essentially there are quite a large
number of possible combinations of
things you can do you're certainly right
that contact tracing is one of those but
i think what you know what i said i
think we need to do is put two ministers
all the various things that are possible
and at that point they will decide what
the right combination is that achieves
the best public health and wider social
goals i mean gordan just on the let's be
clear about this a vaccine is not going
to come in any time particularly soon to
allow us to ease out of the current
social distancing measures into a
transition i think it would and I'll be
corrected if I'm
good about this you'll be more likely to
be of particular value in stopping a
second global wave down the track if we
don't eliminate coronavirus for good so
I just add to that so I think in the
long run the exit from this is going to
be one of two things
ideally one of which is a highly
effective vaccine and there a variety of
ways vaccines can be deployed they can
be deployed for tamping down epidemics
they can be deployed to protect
vulnerable people or and or highly
effective drugs so that people will stop
dying of this disease even if they catch
it or which can prevent this disease in
vulnerable people until we have those
and the probability of having those
anytime in the next calendar year are
incredibly small and I think we should
be realistic about that we're gonna have
to rely on other social measures which
of course are very socially disruptive
as everyone is finding at the moment but
until that point that is what we will
have to do and it'll have to be the best
combination that maximizes the outlooks
but it's going to take a long time and I
think we need to be aware of that
cool do you want to come back on any
that well just briefly on to press a
witty and if you're saying that that you
don't expect a vaccine to be available
in the next calendar year are you
effectively saying that we're going to
have very socially disruptive measures
for probably the next calendar year and
sorry just just to come back first
secretary on exercise Cygnus very
quickly could I just ask have you
personally read the document and has it
been made available to all your key
scientific advisers I would have to go
and check Fred a huge volume over recent
weeks but it's not something that
immediately springs to mind Chris only
in vaccines I mean I'm very hopeful that
we will have vaccines which have proof
of concept much earlier than a year to
be clear and there are very large
numbers of people around the world very
good groups excellent ones in the UK
first vaccine tomorrow in de man are
here
but there is a long path between having
a vaccine as proof of concept and until
we have either a vaccine or a drug it
doesn't I mean we have managed other
epidemics without a vaccine HIV as an
example where it's managed with a drug
or with combinations of drugs but until
we have those solutions yes what we have
available to us are social measures and
thats obviously what we're using and
what's the optimal combination of those
and Gordon there one thing I just add
and it's really important to reinforce
this message the lower we get the our
level the transmission rate the more
options we have which is why our message
right now is been just to focus on
keeping up the adherence to the social
distancing measures it is making a big
difference and of course the more we get
the transmission level down the wider
the range of options that that we would
have in place they've accused from PA on
G being and you're considering a mass
population testing program and if so how
would that be administered when it comes
to contact tracing
are you planning to rely on this new app
that's being developed or you thinking
there's gonna be a huge amount of
manpower needed and if so is something
the general Carter and the military
would be involved in Chris talk about
the wider mapping look we're boosting
the testing capacity that we're looking
at the functionality and the way the app
would work the more options we they're
the two big factors in it I think it
leans into the question the coroner is
asking the two factors that will help
give us a greater range as we transition
to the next phase when the evidence
suggests that we can we'll be getting
the transmission level down and the the
level of testing and the functionality
of the the app in order to allow us to
look at the various different options
and control any potential resurgence of
the virus because we want to be
mitigating and keeping it as low as
possible so that's why we're putting so
much effort into the not just the
testing but also the wider tracking and
tracing that could be put around that
and it can as the as the week's
proceeded that could have a significant
impact on our ability to to ease out of
the current social distancing measures
there's a lot of things that you can do
with testing
obviously patient management obviously
allowing people who are in lockdown and
they've got a relative in the house and
that's the reason they're there and
they're key workers to see if they're
able to go to work obviously though and
this is an area which we will be doing a
lot more of testing across the community
to find out at the earliest possible
stage if we're starting to see a
resurgence of this virus because at the
moment we're relying on a situation when
people get as far as Hospital if they do
that that I've had five days in which
they don't have any symptoms they might
have had up to a week when things are
getting worse and so you're you're
behind the curve if you rely on that so
we're going to certainly be doing a lot
more population testing and we'll go
into details of that once we got this
going very shortly to find at the
earliest point is the odd below one are
we still going down or is there some
part of the country where they are is
beginning to get up in which case we
then need to act so that is going to be
part of a wider range of things we need
to do with the tests and that's why we
set those tests out the five principles
out last Thursday because all of those
factors inform their proposals any
future decisions we might make David
would you like to follow up there yeah
just on the on the contact tracing up do
you think the British public would be
willing to install this on their
smartphones given the necessary invasion
of privacy it would entail and what
about the proportion of the population
that don't have a smartphone or wouldn't
feel confident well the both good points
I think overwhelmingly what the public
expect of us right now is to innovate as
best we can to try and ease our way out
to the next phase of this virus in a way
that protects public health but also
allows us to go back to the kind of
economic social life that is as close to
normal as possible so we'll innovate in
those areas and if we come up with
something which is that is effective
we'll have to look at those decisions
but I think people do understand that
we're in an exceptional crisis and we
need to take measures that we probably
wouldn't think about doing if we weren't
in this crisis Kate Wilson from the
Bristol Post evening um firstly to the
chief medical officer as we've already
heard the health secretary secretary
service
afternoon you can't now reach the peak
with the Korean virus outbreak does that
peak extend to places like the Bristol
area where the numbers of cases and
deaths are much lower than in other
parts of the country or could they peak
later and therefore well Bristol's
Nightingale hospital which is going to
be ready to take its first patients from
this weekend
still be needed and secondly for the
first secretary we know that two-thirds
of SMEs and Bristol have stopped trading
since lockdown began if Russell's
figures have indeed peaked at a lower
level would you consider an earlier exit
from lockdown in order to restart the
economy here Christie
thank you very much Kate you want to go
first Chris so I'll go on the obviously
on there on the issue about the numbers
you're of course right that the
Southwest has had probably the least
impact from Co vid so far
I mean Bristol itself has had under 500
cases from memory that's also true in
the social care setting so there's a
month as a smaller proportion of social
of cares care homes have been affected
by coded outbreaks in the southwest and
then they have in other parts of the
country so of course that is absolutely
right the thing about the the the peak
we are going through at the moment
however is that it's not in a sense at
the natural peak of an epidemic without
us doing anything
it's a peak brought about by the British
people staying at home and actually not
giving the virus the opportunity to
spread and therefore the actual peak of
it is likely to occur in most parts of
the country I'd really a very similar
time there is a little bit of evidence
that as a slightly earlier effect in
London but really elsewhere there is a
little bit of regional variation but
there's much less because basically this
is an artificial peak brought about by
our activity than the might have been
had this been been running on mid
unmitigated which clearly was absolutely
what we are trying to avoid in terms of
the nightingale in in Bristol and this
would be true of all the nightingales it
it firstly gave us the ability if this
had the British people had not heeded
quite the
fantastic extent they had and have been
more pressure on the NHS it gave us
capacity to deal with emergencies it
still will give us and the other
nightingales of give us flexibility
because if you think about the two forms
of concern that I was talking about
earlier the direct deaths but also the
indirect s having the Nightingale
capacity enormous help from the Armed
Forces in setting up so fast does
actually mean that when we're planning
forward this does give us a number of
options we would not have had if those
were not there now we shall see how they
are properly used I'm absolutely
delighted that nightingales have really
not had to be used in great numbers for
Kovac because that is in sense a sign of
success we have had a being able to cope
with this within the emergency
environment of the NHS already but the
NHS is going to be under pressure from
kovat for really quite a long time and
having that flexibility is an additional
thing we can work out work through in
try in terms of how best to deploy NHS
resources for the next several months
okay small businesses are the lifeblood
of our economy and they're going through
a really tough time right now
SMEs create the lion's share of jobs in
this country they have done over a
sustained period so we absolutely want
to see them through this crisis and
they'll be part of Britain bouncing back
in due course but the risk right now of
but for all of those small businesses is
that if we move too early to ease up in
the way that your question suggested not
only would we get second spike in the
virus we would need to then have a
second lockdown
that would protract the economic pain
and all of the uncertainty that goes
with it I can tell you that in terms of
the support given to Bristol City
Council they've been allocated more than
88 million pounds as part of the
government's business support package
and we've identified 8,000 business
properties which may be eligible for a
grant more than 4000 grant payments have
been made and and on top of that we've
got the loan guarantees the coronavirus
job a retention scheme deferral of that
payments tax relief and other cash
grants so I take your point that we
they're the heart and soul of this
country small businesses we'll do
everything we can but I think it would
be counterproductive if not dangerous if
we eased up too early not just for
public health but also for entrepreneurs
would you like to come back on any that
the the answer all as part of Delia
Nightingale hospital in Bristol so I
know you said they've been helped
helpful in setting it up are they also
going to be helping staff as well well
the way that the military have intended
to work with all the Nightingale
hospitals but I'll pass on to c.d.s to
supplement is to support what the NHS
workers are doing and so it will depend
on the specifications for each
Nightingale Hospital but they're there
to support the NHS staff so is there
anything you'd add to that for the
Bristol yes I mean in Bristol we have
allocated some combat medics to act as
nurses and the like and some sort of
general duties personnel to help support
it as well
thanks very much Kate that's all I think
for this press conference thank you
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC Dorko dot UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News